## The fossil of Tiktaalik (Paleontology)
Paleontologists—scientists who research ancient life by studying fossils- long ago established that the first animals to move from the ocean to land must have done so during the Devonian era (419 to 359 million years ago). As these animals moved out of the ocean, they slowly began developing physical features, such as limbs and lungs, suited to the atmospheric and gravitational demands of terrestrial (land-based) life. For years, paleontologists attempted to determine from fossil fragments what the first land-based animals might have looked like. Then in April 2006, researchers in Canada's Nunavut Territory discovered an amazingly well-preserved and complete skeleton of a creature <ins>that they believe is an important missing link showing how these early land animals probably evolved</ins>.<br/><br/>
The two-foot-long (61 centimeter-long) fossil is of an animal that scientists have named Tiktaalik Roseae, which means "large shallow water fish" in the language of the region's Inuit people. <ins>The creature lived 370 million years ago in what was at that time part of a large, swampy landmass near Earth's equator-this area moved to its current location as a result of shifts in the plates that make up Earth's surface</ins>. At that time, deciduous plants were thriving, periodically shedding their leaves in the water, which attracted small prey into warm swampy shallows that were difficult for larger fish to swim in. Scientists believe that competition for food among fish in the oceans had become intense, leading Tiktaalik and other species to begin exploring opportunities in these swampy regions.<br/>

<br/>

## Chavin de Huantar (Architecture & Archaeology)
Chavin de Huantar is one of the most celebrated ceremonial centers in the Andes. It is an archaeological site containing ruins and artifacts originally constructed around 900 BC by the Chavin, a pre-Inca culture. Evidence suggests that the site flourished from 850 to 200 BC, making the Chavin society one of the earliest civilizations in South America.<br/><br/>
Located at an elevation of nearly 3,150 meters above sea level, Chavin de Huantar is ringed by high snow-covered mountains in the north-central highlands of Peru. To its west is the Cordillera Blanca, whose glaciated peaks often exceed 5,500 meters, and to its east is another somewhat lower, but equally steep mountain range, the Cordillera Oriental.<br/><br/>
Chavin de Huantar was home to a moderately large agricultural society. The initial settlement was a small ceremonial center surrounded by domestic structures that together made up a vigorous highland community. Its location on a key trade route midway between the Peruvian coast and the lowland tropical forest to the east made Chavin de Huantar a natural trade center. This strategic position allowed the Chavin people to control the region's trade routes, increase the exchange of goods with other people and regions, and import goods that were not natural to the area.<br/><br/>
The Chavin de Huantar site consists of two main structures, the Old Temple and the New Temple. The Old Temple was an inward-facing U-shaped structure with a central court. The court contained obelisks and stone monuments with low relief carvings depicting jaguars, caimans, hawks, and various anthropomorphic forms. The interior of the temple contained a maze of passageways, chambers, and water conduits.<br/><br/>
The New Temple, constructed between 500 and 200 BC, also contained many relief sculptures and was a more block-like form. A massive stair led up to an elevated landing with a sunken rectangular court. Hidden passageways and platforms allowed Chavin priests to miraculously appear above their audiences.<br/><br/>
The site has given its name to the famous Chavin art style of carved stone figures and images, which uses intricate geometrical and curvilinear motifs that combine the features of humans, snakes, jaguars, caimans, birds, and other animals to create strange and fascinating new creatures. The Chavin style used a special carving technique known as contour rivarly, which allows an image or figure to have multiple interpretations, depending on the angle at which it is viewed. Turning or moving the piece causes a new design to emerge.<br/><br/>
Chavin artwork was highly symbolic and made intentionally difficult to interpret. The artwork was used in Chavin religious rituals, and the complex sacred designs were intended to be understood only by high priests of the Chavin cult, who were able to maintain power and authority by keeping the knowledge hidden from the ordinary Chavin people.<br/><br/>
The art and temple architecture of the Chavin de Huantar site continues to attract the attention of Andean archaeologists and other researchers. The site has revealed many details about the lives and rituals of this ancient civilization.<br/>

<br/>

## Chimpanzee Research: Do Chimpanzees Transmit Culture? (Animal Behavior & Education)
In a recent study, research teams examined chimpanzee populations in Africa. They observed ways that chimpanzees appear to pass behavior from one generation to another. Based on the experiment, the research team asked the question of whether chimpanzees could learn to utilize tools from each other in the same way. Behavior that is learned from others in a population and passed along in this manner is what we call culture. In posing the question of whether chimpanzees can experience culture, the scientists had raised a controversial issue. In the past, most biologists have thought that only humans experienced culture. Although testing this type of learning in the field has been difficult, investigators at Yerkes National Primate Research Center in Atlanta, Georgia, recently performed an experiment guided by the notion that chimpanzees can learn particular ways to use tools by observing other chimps. Thus, the controversial hypothesis that chimpanzees can transmit culture was tested.<br/><br/>
The investigators at Yerkes predicted that if they taught one chimp to use a stick to obtain food from a dispenser, other chimps would learn the technique from the educated one. They divided chimpanzees into two experimental groups with sixteen in each group, and then they taught a high-ranking female in each group to use a stick to obtain food from an apparatus. The two chimps were taught different methods. While one of the female chimps was taught to poke the stick inside the device to free the food, the other was taught to use the stick to lift a hook. This action removed an obstruction, which allowed the food to roll forward out of the device.<br/><br/>
A third group served as a control group, the group that is left untreated or unexposed to a procedure. In this case, the chimps in the control group were given access to the sticks and the apparatus with the food inside but were not taught how to use the sticks. All of the control-group chimps manipulated the apparatus with the stick, but none succeeded in releasing food.<br/><br/>
When the two chimps were returned to their initial groups, other chimps observed how the educated chimps used the stick, and a large majority began to use sticks in the same way. The chimps in each group learned the specific style of using the stick that their educated chimp had been taught. <ins>All but two</ins> of the chimps learned to use the stick, though some of them later forgot what they had mastered. Two months later, the apparatus was reintroduced to the chimps, and most of the chimps used the learned technique for obtaining food. It was concluded that the results of the experiment supported the hypothesis that chimpanzees are capable of culturally transmitting learned technology.<br/>

<br/>

## The Wit of Oscar Wilde (Literature)
Wit involves an apt, clever, and often humorous association of words. Oscar Wilde's play "The Importance of Being Earnest," for example, is satirical in its constant wordplay, most notably in exploiting the multiple meanings of the word "earnest/Ernest," signifying honesty when spelled "earnest" and a man's name when spelled "Ernest." The play is famous for making fun of the superficiality of nineteenth-century upper-class England. Wilde's wit is a fine example of gentle satire. The author does not expect or desire any change in society or the viewer; he wishes merely to amuse.<br/>

<br/>

## The Ewe (History)
Triumph over adversity is an important theme in Ewe oral history. Until they came to their present home on the west coast of Africa, the Ewe had lived precariously as a minority within kingdoms of more powerful peoples. One story in their oral tradition recounts their exodus in the late 1600s from Notsie, a walled city-state located in what is now southern Togo. Intimidating Notsie's warriors with fierce drumming, the Ewes escaped under cover of darkness. Moving toward the southwest, they founded many settlements along a large lagoon near the mouth of the Volta River. At last their leaders declared that he was too tired to continue, and his people made a home for themselves in the area.<br/><br/>
Other families of Ewe-speakers settled nearby along the coast and in the upland hills. The Ewe communities grew and multiplied in these new lands. Eventually the small Ewe settlements expanded into divisions whose inhabitants could all trace male ancestors to the original villages. Family heads or distinguished war leaders became chiefs. Despite bonds of common culture and history, each division zealously loved its independence.<br/>

<br/>

## Extinction of Herbivores in the Americas (Ecology)
About 11,000 years ago, many large herbivores (plant-eaters) became extinct, especially in the Americas. Various theories have been offered to explain why. Researchers who favor the idea that hunting by humans was the main reason point out that the Clovis people of the Americas possessed especially good hunting skills and expanded rapidly through the Americas at about the time that the extinctions occurred. These scientists cite several additional patterns of supporting evidence. First, hunters favor large animals as prey because a single kill provides abundant meat. Second, large animals are especially easy to locate. Third, extinctions of large animals were especially numerous in North and South America where humans had arrived only recently, and animals may not have feared them. Few extinctions occurred in Eurasia and Africa where large animals had long experience with hunters. Finally, those species of large American herbivores that did not become extinct had recently migrated from Eurasia, where they had learned to fear human hunters.<br/>

<br/>

## Applied Arts and Fine Arts (Fine Arts & Crafts)
Although we now tend to refer to the various crafts according to the materials used to construct them-clay, glass, wood, fiber, and metal-it was once common to think of crafts in terms of function, which led to their being known as the "applied arts." Approaching crafts from the point of view of function, we can divide them into simple categories: containers, shelters, and supports. There is no way around the fact that containers, shelters, and supports must be functional. The applied arts are thus bound by the laws of physics, which pertain to both the materials used in their making and the substances and things to be contained, supported, and sheltered. These laws are universal in their application, regardless of cultural beliefs, geography, or climate. If a pot has no bottom or has large openings in its sides, it could hardly be considered a container in any traditional sense. Since the laws of physics, not some arbitrary decision, have determined the general form of applied-art objects, they follow basic patterns, so much so that functional forms can vary only within certain limits. Buildings without roofs, for example, are unusual because they depart from the norm. However, not all functional objects are exactly alike; that is why we recognize a Shang Dynasty vase as being different from an Inca vase. What varies is not the basic form but the incidental details that do not obstruct the object's primary function.<br/><br/>
Sensitivity to physical laws is thus an important consideration for the maker of applied-art objects. It is often taken for granted that this is also true for the maker of fine-art objects. This assumption misses a significant difference between the two disciplines. Fine-art objects are not constrained by the laws of physics in the same way that applied-art objects are. Because their primary purpose is not functional, they are only limited in terms of the materials used to make them. Sculptures must, for example, be stable, which requires an understanding of the properties of mass, weight distribution, and stress. Paintings must have rigid stretchers so that the canvas will be taut, and the paint must not deteriorate, crack, or discolor. These are problems that must be overcome by the artist because they tend to intrude upon his or her conception of the work. For example, in the early Italian Renaissance, bronze statues of horses with a raised forelag usually had a cannonball under that hoof. This was done because the cannonball was needed to support the weight of the leg. In other words, the demands of the laws of physics, not the sculptor's aesthetic intentions, placed the ball there. That this device was a necessary structural compromise is clear from the fact that the cannonball quickly diappeared when sculptors learned how to strengthen the internal structure of a statue with iron braces (iron being much stronger than bronze).<br/><br/>
Even though the fine arts in the twentieth century often treat materials in new ways, the basic difference in attitude of artists in relation to their materials in the fine arts and the applied arts remains relatively constant. It would therefore not be too great an exaggeration to say that practitioners of the fine arts work to overcome the limitations of their materials, whereas those engaged in the applied arts work in concert with their materials.<br/>

<br/>

## 
